But there's no way of explaining the Aggie spirit
that I know of. You have to. I know when I went home at
Christmas, and I just laughingly told them about
the hazing, some of it. I didn't tell them all of it.
They didn't want me to go back to A&M, these people I
had been working for. That was home to me from then
on. No, they wanted me to go to University of Texas.
But no way was I going to the SIPP school by then,
because I had been indoctrinated at A&M. I was an
Aggie. And just like this little fella here, he
became an MD, and he's still practicing in Mount
Pleasant, Texas. Little William Taylor, yeah.
The others are dead. Nice little bill. So did you
first come in 1920? 1924. Fall of 1924. Okay. And
then you received your degree in 1931, didn't you?
1931. Well, I changed over to biology, as I said.
And then I took pre-med. And in 1927, I went to
Galveston Medical School. Oh, you did? I was there
a year. And in the first month of June, I was at home.
I broke down with tuberculosis. In fact, I had had
TB here at A&M. I know because I had a pulmonary
hemorrhage one night there in the dormitory. and
went over to the college hospital. This is an
indictment of our college hospital as it was. And
old Arsocks, who was the head nurse, didn't want to
let me in because it was after hours. They closed it
at 9 o'clock. No matter if you had tuberculosis or
not. I was spitting out blood. Really? I was having
a pulmonary hemorrhage. And I had pleurisy so
badly that I could hardly breathe. So she finally
let me in and gave me a bed. The next morning, the
doctor had me get up and come around to his office
instead of coming to my bed. Of course, I didn't
know what was wrong with me at that time. But he
examined me and said there was a little place up in
my nasal cavity that was raw and was bleeding and it
was running down in my throat and I was spitting it
up. I said, well I don't know about that because I
had my head over like this between my knees almost
and I spat blood out on the piece of paper that I had
on the floor. No blood came out of my nose with my
head in that position. Oh, he says, well, that's
what it is. And so I said, well, what about this
pleurisy? I can hardly breathe. He says, oh, well,
if it gets too bad, come back and I'll strap you
down. So I went ahead. He wouldn't even give me a
military to get me out of revelry, exercises, or
cavalry, drill, or anything, saber charges, or
anything else. So I streaked along for several
weeks, just a little blood, But I finally got over
it. I don't know how. And that came up in later
years. There was a committee investigating the
college hospital. This was during Mr.
Gilchrist's time as president. And so they had a
committee over from Scott and White to examine the
college hospital. And of course, they found it A1
because Dr. Marsh, who was the resident
physician, had interned at Scott and White. Sure.
So nothing. And I had a friend who was externing
that year. He was a medical student in Galveston.
He was externing as an extern in the college
hospital. And they didn't allow him to come back to
the hospital that day. And just only the licensed
nurse was there. And the others, they kept away.
Anyhow, I don't know whether you want to put that in
there or not, but anyhow, they had me up and I
reported to this committee and all that sort of
thing, and they had the investigation and
whitewashed the whole thing. Well, I went to
Galveston Medical School in September following
that. And what do you think happened? You got TB. I
never did recover. Really? I never did recover. I
knew there was something wrong with me during the
whole year, but then when June came around, I broke
down again. And that time, I went out to
Sanatorium, Texas, was admitted out there, and I
spent five months out there. Got an arrested case.
Oh, good. And by that time, I was out of money,
strapped. We had, my father had sold the lower
farm, and I did get my mother's part. There were
five children for that to be divided among. I got my
part from my mother's interest in the place. And I
had that to go on, but that wasn't enough to take me
back to medical school. But that year, I came back
to A&M.
I was sitting there on the corner of Old Gathright,
the porch on Old Gathright Hall, which has been
torn down many years ago. After I'd registered, I
wondered what I was going to do. Who wants to room
with someone who's had tuberculosis? Well, I just
happened to look up about that time, and here came
an old boy down Military Walk. He and I had been at
sanatorium together. Oh, really? Yeah. And so I
said, hey, come here. What are you doing? He said, I
just registered. I'm going to A&M. I said, well,
where are you going to live? He said, I don't know
yet. I'll have to find a place. I said, well, wait a
minute. We'll find a place together. Two old
lungers. So we found a place in Bryant. So in other
words, you didn't live on campus. No, I didn't. I
couldn't have gone in the dormitory because there
was no place for them. It was all military. In other
words, you didn't have to be in the military, no?
Once you were initiated past the fish, you didn't
have to? Yeah, you had to in those days. Everybody
had to be in the military. They were all in the
military. So you lived off campus and then
everybody still nevertheless wore that poor
uniform. Well, he and I didn't because we were just
classified as day students then. But if you lived
in the dormitory, you were in the military and you
wore the uniform and so on. When I first went to A&M,
everybody wore the uniform whether they were
crippled or not. Casual, they lived around over
there in either Alpha or Beta Hall, those old halls
that were down there where Walton Hall is now.
There were two old southern homes with the big
columns in front and so on. That's where the
cosmopolites lived, the foreign students and all
the cripples and what have you. They called them
gold breakers and sons of rest and all that sort of
thing. Anyhow. He and I roomed together, and I went
to A&M. And that was in 1929. And 1930,
he and I were still together. We got us a room over at
Bryan Nursery and Floral Company, fired the
boiler, and stemmed flowers, and helped around
the place for our room, and boarded next door.
1931, while we lived on the back porch at his
mother's home on Texas Avenue in Bryan. Just the
other side of where that hat company is now. Old
two-story house. Why did you decide to go to
veterinary school? Well, back about 1930, I began
taking elective courses in veterinary medicine.
Because you could get bacteriology and
physiology and some good courses over there at
that time in those areas. And they would allow you
to pick up electives in veterinary medicine.
Because in 1930, they had only one student
graduate.
The beginning of the Great Depression.
They were very happy to have people come over so
they could keep their courses open. So 1931, I got
my degree in biology. And I began work on a master's
degree in biology. In 1932, I picked up my first
fellowship, $45 a month.
I didn't know if Dr. Ball, who was head of the
biology department, had mapped out my work for two
years.
And he thought I would have the fellowship both
years. Well, in 1932, it worked nicely. I had the
fellowship, $45 a month. And I was still doing all
my cooking and washing and ironing and everything
myself.
time came in 1932 for me to come back to school. It
was in the fall of 32. And Dr. Ball found out that I
couldn't have the fellowship two years in
succession. It was in the fall of 33. I couldn't
have this fellowship two years in succession. Dr.
Morgan, who was dean of the graduate school, said
they only had eight fellowships at A&M, and they
had to pass them around. So I didn't find that out
until it was too late for me to do anything else
about it. I didn't have money enough to come back to
school. I worked for the Texas Highway Department
that year. Oh, you did. $3 and a half a day. And the
little course that I had in plane surveying came in
handy. Because I knew how to set up the transit, the
levels, and so on. I knew what they were doing with
points on the tangent and all that business. I knew
what they were doing. And rainy days, I worked in
the office running a planimeter, figuring out
cross sections and the amount of dirt removed and
so on, what to pay the contractor and what not. So it
worked out very nicely. I saved my money. The
following year, then I came back to A&M. I picked up
that fellowship again at $45 a month.
But nevertheless, that was still in biology,
right? Still in biology. This was in
bacteriology. Well, why'd you decide to go into
veterinary medicine then? Well, I graduated. I
got my master's degree in 34 in biology. I had about
half of the course in veterinary medicine worked
off as electives. I see. So it was a toss-up whether
to go for a PhD in bacteriology or should I go ahead
and finish veterinary medicine. I see. Well, PhD
in bacteriology, a dime a dozen. Oh, they were in
the Depression. Mm-hmm. Veterinary medicine, to
me, was the better of the better choice. And that's
what I took. So I picked up a fellowship then in
pathology. One of these. Another $450 deal. I was
still living off the campus and still doing all of
my cooking and washing and ironing and what have
you. And still with this same old boy, you and I. And
Brian. So I had that fellowship two years. And that
took me on through then. And I graduated in
veterinary medicine in August of 36. And Dr.
Marsteller hired me as an instructor for
September of 36.
And I began teaching then as an instructor in
pathology.
Summers of 37 and the summers of 38, Ruth and I took
out, went to Michigan, University of Michigan.
Really? Took their pathology in medical school.
They would admit a veterinarian. You had to have a
doctor's degree in the medical sciences, either
an MD or a DVM or a DDS. So they would admit you. Well,
could you compare the level of instruction with
the University of Michigan with... with Texas A&M
about at that time? You'd have to go back and look at
veterinary school at Texas A&M. It was created or
established in 1916, I believe it was. And to begin
with, they were very well equipped and staffed.
But with one graduate in 1930, I don't know. The
thing had gone down, and when I got into pathology
in 1936, to be truthful, it had gone to nothing. It
was a bunch of junk. Why is that? All the equipment
had just gone to pot. 20 years old. Rusted out,
obsolete, what have you, torn up junk. And that was
it. So when I began in pathology, we had no slide
collection. We had some gross specimens of old
lesions, tumors, and what have you. But they
hadn't been taken care of. The fluid had been
allowed to evaporate and the specimen dry out and
what have you. So there I was. I was to teach general
pathology and special pathology. I didn't have a
thing. not a slide. If you wanted to show a section
of acute inflammation, you didn't have a section
of showing an acute inflammation. You didn't have
anything. You had to talk about it and draw
pictures on the board. That's about the only way.
Well, in pathology, I had to do all of the autopsy
work in the College of Veterinary Medicine.
Everything that came into the to the post-mortem
room was subject to my investigation. I had to do
the post on it and report on it to Dr. Marsteller or
to the clinicians. I saved all of the specimens. I
got material for sectioning.
I did all of that work myself. I was the only one in
pathology. I had no technical help. I did all of the
sectioning and staining and so on. I did all of the
post-mortem work. I took all the gross specimens.
I put them in museum jars on Saturdays and Sundays
and so on, and nights. And maybe you have a class in
general pathology, and perhaps you're taking up
the pneumonias. You just had an old cow or some
animal that died and she had pneumonia. I don't
know. Maybe what kind you have to determine. So
you've sectioned the tissue. You've made a class
set. And you run down to class with this couple of
trays of slides with the balsam still fresh and the
cover slips almost floating. Tell them to be very
careful with these slides. I've just made them. So
we studied whatever that was. Well, our students
had very little background in normal microscopic
structure of tissues, histology. Had very little
training, because that was in the Department of
Anatomy. And evidently, they had nothing there
either. No slides. Maybe they, well, Dr. Mundink
came that year. Well, he didn't come until, Well,
it was in the late 30s. But anyway, he tried to make
some slides. But they were overstained, burnt up,
not very good. But anyway, I had to make up
histology sections as well, normal tissues, as
well as the abnormal. And I had to teach them the
normal first and then show them the
abnormalities.
So that's the way the pathology went. I
think that's the only way to teach histology,
actually. In other words, during the middle
1930s, you had a real dearth of supplies at the
school. Do you know what my budget was? No. $500 a
year. Really? That's all? And I was the only staff
member in pathology. I had no technical help
whatsoever. And that technical help thing went on
for 15 years. It wasn't until in the 1950s that I got
technical help. Up to that time, I did everything
myself. Well, is that what the main difference
between there and the University of Michigan? Did
they have money? They had the money. Because they
didn't have the money that Michigan State had.
Right. Because Michigan State was like
University of Texas. They were in the capital
city. They got the money. And the University of
Michigan was like A&M. We got the hind tit. That was
it. And so that's the way poor old A&M was. We didn't
have anything to work with. And back in those days,
we had in the administration what I've always
termed the button shoe boys. Can you explain that
one? I think I'm going to like it. Well, the Button
Shoe Boys were from the old school. And you were
judged as an administrator by the way you carried
on your appropriation, your budget, and you
turned money back at the end of the year. Oh,
really? Yeah. You could do with what they dished
out to you and then turn a little back That was about
the way it was, or the way I thought it was, anyhow.
We didn't have anything to work with, and if you got
anything, you almost had to fight somebody for it.
And as far as equipment went, in pathology, it was
the same way in anatomy when I went there. Dr.
Francis had bought five little old high school
microscopes. I think he paid $35 a piece for them.
And that's all we had in the way of microscopes. And
you had to beg, borrow, and steal from other
departments microscopes enough for the group,
for the class.
Tables, kitchen tables, just plain old kitchen
tables.
Chairs, old cane bottom chairs that you got out of
the basement. They'd been thrown away.
We had no air conditioning in the summer classes or
in the spring or the hot days in the fall. All the
windows were open. We had all male in the class, no
females. I said, just take your shirts off and
strip down to the waist. Really? Right in class? In
class. It was too hot. And even at that, you're
trying to do microscopic work, and the
perspiration is dripping off your elbow. You're
sitting there. How can you work in that condition?
It's like being in a boiler room. It'd be better out
there in the shade of a tree.
And that's the way it was at Texas A&M. Well, when
did they get electricity for electric fans and
things like that? Well, they had the electricity
then. But they didn't have the money for the fans?
They sure didn't have a fan. Only the president had
a fan in his office. That's the same way when I was
yelling my head off for air conditioning when we
were putting up the new veterinary hospital out
over there. And Reese Spence was sitting there
with us, going over the plans. And I said, well, are
we going to have air conditioning in this new
setup? Oh, he hit the ceiling. Why, even Mr.
Gilchrist's office isn't air conditioned. I
never had air conditioning when I was at Purdue.
So they didn't air condition. I said, well, Mr.
Spence, if you were in business in Bryan, Texas,
say you were in a haberdashery, and here's another
haberdashery right next to you, and he's air
conditioned, who would get to business if you were
not air conditioned? I said, that guy'd get all the
business and he'd run you out. And I said, it's the
same way right now. Sam Houston University over
there. When was this? This is in the 50s when they
were building that? Yeah, this was in the 50s. So
they have air conditioning over there in their
dormitories in the summertime. And our students
are going to Sam Houston in the summertime. Sure, I
don't blame them. Not over here in these dives that
we roast them. Come
out parboiled.
But you know, they did not air condition that new
set up. And it wasn't until several years later
that they went in there and then they found out that
the duct system was too small to accommodate air
conditioning. They have to tear out all the ducts
and punch the buildings all full of holes and
enlarge their Addicts and so on for ducks and what
have you. Then we got, for several hundred
thousand dollars more, we got air conditioning.
Even though over there in that new setup, I had a
great big room for histology. I was in anatomy
then. This was to be air conditioned. No windows.
And only one door into the hallway. This was to be a
dark room laboratory, because I used a projector
and projected the slides on the screen for them to
study. This was one from their set, see? So that
when they began to study it, they had already been
over it with me. And they knew where to look for what
and where. So we finally got two great big old
three-foot fans. and set them at different places
in the room so it'd stir up the air and blow you out of
your wig off. But anyhow, they finally put me a
five-ton unit in the ceiling in the back of that
room. That was before the remainder of the
building was air-conditioned. I raised so much
chain about it. And then you'd almost freeze them
out. Right, right. trying to get that thing
regulated in any way. Let's go back for a minute to
when you were a student in the vet school. Who were
your favorite instructors? Well, my favorite
instructors were Dr. Burns in physiology. Dr.
Burns was always very thorough. He was tough as a
boot. Oh, he was. But he was thorough. What kind of
person was he besides just being tough? Well, he
was approachable
because he was an Aggie. Burns was an Aggie and I
think he sort of acted like a senior among
underclassmen. He had that discipline.
It's just like our Army officers, the old Aggie
Army officers. They had that discipline.
They carried themselves well, and they proved it
in World War II. Dr. Leonard. Dr. Leonard was
another, and Dr. Dunn, the old boy I worked for in
pathology.
Those fellas.
Did you have Mark Francis? I had Mark Francis.
Yeah, he was a favorite. But I just had him in
anatomy. What kind of teacher was he? He was very
good. Dr. Francis was deaf as a post. He couldn't
hear himself talk. I've heard that from others,
too. He was a comical person. I heard. And that
meant that he talked more than anybody else. Is
that true? Yeah. He had a good sense of humor? He had
a very good sense of humor. I remember one time in
anatomy, he was embalming, trying to get an old
mule down so he could embalm him. And he had wet the
floor so he could throw this old mule. He got the
floor real slippery and this old mule couldn't
stand up on it. It falls by himself. He wasn't shot.
Dr. Francis had on some rubber boots. And these
rubber boots were pretty slick on the bottom. And
his feet went out from under him. And he hit the
ground, hit that concrete floor, kabam. But he
jumped up right away. Of course, we all ran over to
him to pick him up. But he got up before we got there.
There's a little lesson in that. So whenever you
want to throw an old mule, you just wet the floor.
That's the way Dr. Francis was. I went in his office
one day. He had just given an examination. He had a
pile of papers there on his desk. I said, Dr.
Francis, when are you going to grade our papers?
Well, he said, I'll tell you. And he picked up those
papers and he put them in one of the drawers of his
desk and threw an old iron horseshoe in there on top
of them. And then he stomped on it with his foot a
couple of times Slammed the drawer. Said, if
you'll notice, in the college regulations,
they say that you must give examinations. But they
don't say one word about ever grading them. And he
just grinned and looked at me. And he never did
grade them. Really? He says, you know, I never did
flunk but one boy. And I learned my lesson. Said,
you know that fool is a millionaire today?
I guess he should have flunked more of them, boy. I
would have been a millionaire. Maybe he should
have flunked you. I never had any trouble with old
Mark. He was a good old boy. He had a wonderful
collection there. It was built into a museum. He
and Dr. Ball. Dr. Ball spent many years of his life
in getting fossil remains of fern leaves and such
out of the old clay banks on the Brazos River and
what have you. And he spent innumerable hours
working on those babies and getting them. And the
old biology building, torn down many years ago,
The upstairs hallway ran the whole length of the
building, almost. And both sides of the hall,
cases, glass top cases with all these
archaeological specimens that he had worked out
in. He had them all labeled and everything.